\documentclass[]{spieman}

\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage{amsmath,amsfonts,amssymb}
\usepackage{graphicx} 
\usepackage{grffile} 
\usepackage[colorlinks=true, allcolors=blue]{hyperref} 
\usepackage{pdflscape} 
\usepackage{afterpage}
\usepackage[symbol]{footmisc}
\pagenumbering{gobble}

\newcommand\procspie{{Proc.~SPIE}}


% Title definition
\title {The WIYN One Degree Imager in 2018: An Extended 30-Detector Focal Plane}

\author[a,b]{Daniel R. Harbeck} \author[c]{Mike Lesser} \author[b]{Wilson Liu}
\author[d]{Bob Stupak} \author[d]{Ron George} \author[d]{Ron Harris}
\author[d]{Gary Poczulp} \author[d]{Jayadev Rajagopal} \author[e]{Ralf Kotulla}
\author[c]{David Ouellete} \author[e]{Eric Hooper} \author[e]{Michael Smith}
\author[e]{Dustin Mason} \author[f]{Peter Onaka} \author[f]{Greg Chin}
\author[d]{Emily Hunting} \author[d]{Robert Christensen}

\affil[a]{Las Cumbres Observatory, Goleta, CA (USA)} \affil[b]{WIYN Observatory,
Tucson, AZ (USA)} \affil[c]{The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ (USA)}
\affil[d]{NOAO, Tucson, AZ (USA)} \affil[e]{University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
(USA)} \affil[f]{University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI (USA)}

\newcommand{\electron}{e$^-$\xspace} \newcommand{\degree}{$^\circ$\xspace}


\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
    
We report on the performance of the upgraded One Degree Imager (ODI) at the WIYN
3.5 meter telescope at the Kitt Peak Observatory. The focal plane has been
expanded by additional seventeen detectors in spring / summer 2015. The now
thirty Orthogonal Transfer Array CCD detectors provide a total field of view of
40’ x 48’ on the sky. The newly added detectors underwent a design revision to
mitigate reduced charge transfer efficiency under low light conditions (fat zero
problem). We discuss the performance of the focal plane and challenges in the
photometric calibration of the wide field of view, helped by the addition of
telescope baffles. In a parallel project, we upgraded the instrument's filter
mechanism, where a degrading worm-gear mechanism was replaced by a chain drive
that is operating faster and at a higher reliability level. Two more filters, a
U band and narrow band filter were added to the instrument's complement. We will
review the lessons learned during nearly three years of operating the instrument
in the observatory environment and discuss infrastructure upgrades that were
driven by ODI's needs.

\end{abstract}


%>>>> Include a list of keywords after the abstract

\keywords{Ground based instrumentation, wide field imaging, CCD, Orthogonal
    Transfer Array, Observatory Operations}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Introduction}

The One Degree Imager (ODI) has been the major instrument development project
from 2002 to 2015 at the WIYN 3.5 meter telescope (Kitt Peak, Arizona), and its
design and progress has been documented in various SPIE conference contributions
\cite{jacoby2002, Harbeck2008, Jacoby2008, Yeatts2008, Harbeck2010, Yeatts2010,
    harbeck2014, gopu2014}. The instrument is designed for a one degree  square
field of view with 64 Orthogonal Transfer Array (OTA) CCD sensor. A first
incarnation of ODI was deployed in the summer of 2012 with a partially populated
focal plane (with 13 out of 64 detectors installed); this incarnation of ODI was
called pODI and was described in detail at the SPIE Astronomical Telescopes +
Instrumentation conference in 2014\cite{harbeck2014}. In that paper we outlined
an incremental upgrade path for the instrument to a larger focal plane; we have
followed that path, In 2015, ODI was upgraded and deployed at WIYN  with an
enlarged 5x6  detector array by adding 17 new detectors; this incarnation of ODI
is generally  referred to "5x6 ODI", or simply ODI, as no additional development
of the focal plane is planned at this point. In this paper we report on the
status of the instrument after this upgrade.


\section{Upgrade of the Instrument} 

ODI is designed to use Orthogonal Transfer Array (OTA) CCD detectors that have
the unique capability to move charge on both imaging dimensions during an
integration in order to compensate for unwanted image motion. This concept has
been demonstrated in pODI.  The detectors in pODI (production Lot 6) had
problems with (i) amplifier glow and (ii)  charge transfer efficiency under low
light level conditions ("fat zero" problem). The amplifier glow is mitigated by
throttling the output drain voltage of the detectors during integration. The fat
zero problem was traced to a structure between the imaging area and the serial
output register.

A  12 wafer demonstration run (Lot 7) showed that the low light level transfer
inefficiency issue was resolved by a modification\cite{harbeck2014}, and all
wafers of that batch were processed into packaged detectors at Imaging
Technology Laboratory (ITL, Tucson, AZ),  yielding a total of 16 operational 
Lot 7 OTA detectors that were designated for the ODI focal plane. After 
processing these wafers, the processing equipment for ODI OTA detectors has been
retired at ITL.

The instrument was taken out of commission for upgrading from November 2014 to
May 2015. The focal plane was immediately removed from the instrument and sent
to  Imaging Technology Laboratory  (ITL) in Tucson, AZ to add the 16 new
detectors; an additional Lot 6 device was identified and added to the focal
plane as well. The 14 Lot 6 and 16 Lot 7 detectors were mounted on the focal
plane to result in a contiguous 4x4 area of Lot 7 detectors, with the remaining
Lot 6 detectors filling up an area to a 5 by 6 detector array (See Figure
\ref{fig_focalplane}).


\begin{figure}
	\centering
	\hfill
	\includegraphics[height=0.4\textwidth]{images/detectorsOnFocalPlane5x6.jpg}
	\hfill
	\includegraphics[height=0.4\textwidth]{images/5ODI_Imprint.png}
	\hfill \\[1ex]
	
	\caption{\label{fig_focalplane} Left: Upgraded focal plane with 30 
	detectors installed in a 5 x 6 array. The remaining detector positions are 
	covered with blackout plates to prevent stray light. Right: Imprint of the 
	detectors on sky. the total field of view is of order of $40'\times 48'$. 
	Known defective cells are marked with a red cross. }
\end{figure}


While the focal plane was repopulated with detectors, the cryostat and the 
instrument hardware were refurbished. We found in particular:
\begin{itemize}
	\item Some epoxy-sealed vacuum feed throughs had developed  leaks. We 
	attribute those to the thermally cycling casued by the nearby CCD controllers. 
	The daytime idle position of the instrument was changed to prevent the 
	formation of heat pockets near the vacuum seals, and to allow a better
	convective cooling flow in the CCD controller chassis.
	
	\item Inside the dewar we have identified areas of outgassing residue; 
	those areas have been cleaned. 
	
	\item The optical surfaces of ODI's corrector optics needed cleaning,
	 including the inside of the cryostat's dewar window. 
	
	\item The lubricant in a ring bearing for the atmospheric dispersion 
	corrector (ADC) prism had separated, and the liquid oil component started to 
	flow over one of the prisms. The optics were cleaned with no detrimental effect 
	to the surface and anti-reflection coating. Since the ADC bearings operate 
	only at a very slow speed, the lubricant had been entirely removed from the 
	ring bearings to avoid the risk of future leaks. 
	

\item  At the time of the dewar refurbishment, the molecular sieve material in
the dewar (Zeolite 5-A) had lost its ability to adsorb gas in the dewar, leading
to unmanageable short vacuum hold time of a few days only and it was hence 
replaced with fresh material 5-A material. In the past, the Zeolite 5-A had been
replaced on an annual basis due to its saturation. Since replacing the Zeolite
in the dewar is an expensive and labour intensive operation, we started to
investigate hydrophobic Zeolite ZSM-5 as a replacement candidate. Since ZSM-5
does not permanently bind water s 5-A does, it can be regenerated by vacuum
pumping at room temperature.

A year after the upgrade we found the Zeolite 5-A to  saturated again, and at
that time it was replaced with Zeolite ZSM-5. After more than one and a half years of
operations, the ZSM-5 material still performs well and shows no signs of
saturation. We note that the ODI dewar is warmed up and vacuum-pumped a regular
bases (every few months), which is regenerating the ZSM-5's ability to adsorb
gas.

\end{itemize}

\subsection{Focal Plane  Performance}


As expected the Lot 7 OTA detectors performed similar to the Lot 6 detectors,
but without the low light level charge transfer efficiency problem. Since the
5x6ODI focal plane  utilizes  both Lot 6 and Lot 7 detectors, observations that
depend on the full field of view still require minimum exposure level of the
order of 100 electrons. If the smaller field of view of the continuous Lot 7
sub-array is sufficient, those restrictions do not apply. The amplifier glow
observed in Lot 6 detectors remains unchanged, and is mitigated by throttling 
the output drain voltage for all detectors but those that are used for guide
star acquisition.

Controlling the output drain of the OTA detectors during integration and idling
leads to a change in their power dissipation . We estimated the  difference
between the output drain on and off to about 0.5W per detector. Reading out the
detectors with output drain on will hence dissipate an additional 15 Watts into
the focal plane for the readout time of about 6 seconds. This causes temperature
variations in the focal plane of the order of several  few tens of to a full
degree K, in particular during a high cadence use cases. While the total cooling
power of the ODI focal plane would be sufficient to cool a focal plane that was
populated with 64 OTA detectors, the temperature could not be held stable due to
the need to throttle the output drain voltage during integration.


The Stargrasp CCD controller\cite{onaka2008} used in ODI can control one or two
detectors per board. For pODI, a maximum of one detector was connected per CCD,
and the cross-talk behavior for two connected detectors was not yet
demonstrated in ODI. In the 5x6 ODI focal plane, 2/3 of the detectors share a
controller board, whereas 1/3 of the detectors are controlled by a single
Stargrasp board each. No evidence of cross-talk between the two channels of a
Stargrasp board was found.

The detectors in the pODI instrument were place to sample the entire 1x1 degree
field of view of ODI, and the delivered image quality of pODI was found to be
better then 0.4" on sky over the entire field of view in the ODI g',r',i', and
z' band filters. The same was found for the 5x6 ODI focal plane, i.e., the 
alignment was reproduced when the focal plane was removed and reinstalled into
the dewar for the detector upgrade.



\subsection{Tuning the acquisition software}

The ODI data acquisition software is described in detail in previous SPIE
contributions\cite{Yeatts2008,Yeatts2010}. In short, the 5x6 ODI focal plane is
read out by 20 Stargrasp CCD controllers which interface to a network switch via
individual  1GB ethernet over fiber connections. The switch itself bundles the
data connection into a 10GB network backbone used by the ODI computers (three
units with 24 cores, 32GB RAM each). The data stream from the 30 CCDS is
collected by a single server / java virtual machine that is managed by a JBOSS 5
application server. From there, data are saved to a storage device.

The data rate has more than doubled (from 13 detectors to now 30) to about 1
Gigabyte that downloads from the detectors in about 6 seconds.  The scalability
of the data acquisition system was tested before the upgrade by creating a
mock-up focal plane  configuration to simulate the enlarged focal plane. This
test revealed some bottlenecks: the interval between sustained bias readouts
increased from about 25 seconds to over 40 seconds. Several bottlenecks in the
data acquisition code were identified and mitigated during the upgrade project
and commissioning phase:


\begin{enumerate} 
    
\item For pODI, all data were stored to NFS-mounted storage devices (Oracle ZFS
appliance) and the delay in  write fits files to disk was the major factor to
slow down the data handling process. As a mitigation we equipped the acquisition
server with a Raid 5 configured local storage array, utilizing only disks with a
6G interface; new images are now first stored on the local hard drives. The
image data are then slowly transferred by a background process to the storage
appliance, both as a mid-term storage and to stage data for transfer into the
ODI data archive.

\item   Simultaneously receiving of the data streams from 30 detectors via
TCP/IP posed no major challenge for the 10GB network backbone.  However, when
writing the the data to disk we realized a significant  improvement in the write
speed by limiting the number of data streams that are written in parallel to
disk. As a mitigation, the FITS file writing routine was changed into a Java
{\tt Callable} that would be submitted to a multi-threaded Executor, and we
determined that ten storage threads delivered a good performance. The write
performance was further improved by rewriting the {\tt nom.tam.fits} package to
allow writing into {\tt BufferedOutputfile}.

\item As part of the data storage process, a thumbnail image is generated for
each detector to help the observer to judge image quality in real time. For
pODI, the thumbnail generation was delegated to a command line utility that was
called after the images were written to disk, reading back (and decoding) the
fits file again. Also, the thumbnail generation process was unnecessarily
serialized in the data acquisition process, i.e., telescope observations would
be blocked until thumbnail images were generated.  For 5x6 ODI we have moved the
thumbnail generation into the Java virtual machine, were the data are already in
memory, hence saving I/O and CPU time for FITS decoding. Furthermore, the
generation of the thumbnails was delegated to  lower priority background
threads, making the thumbnail generation an asynchronous process.

    
\end{enumerate}

As indicated by prior testing, the existing IT infrastructure was capable of
handling the larger focal plane after some investments into faster local
storage and by serializing the data storage  processes.  After each readout, about 6 seconds
are spend to flush the detector to remove residual charge, and the readout
overhead is now limited by the detector and telescope performance.


\section{Filter change mechanism upgrade and performance}


\begin{figure}[]
	
	\hfill
	\includegraphics[height=0.49\textwidth]{images/filterdrivetest.png}	\hfill
	\includegraphics[height=0.49\textwidth]{images/DSC_0309.JPG} \hfill \hfill
    
	\caption{\label{fig_filterdrive} Left: Single filter arm test assembly. The
    42x42 cm filter is simulated by a drive. This assembly was used to stress-test
    the filter arm drive concept with order of six thousand in and out actuation.
    Right: Close-up of the three-filter layer assembly during installation at the
    instrument.} 

\end{figure}

ODI has a filter change mechanism that can hold up to nine filters, where each
filter is about 42cm by 42 cm in size. Each filter is inserted an removed out of
the beam by a semaphore-like filter arm that was originally driven by a worm
gear\cite{Muller2008}. Due to the proximity to optical surfaces, the worm gear
contact was operating without lubrication (steel on bronze contact). 
During integration testing of pODI in 2012 it was realized that this drive would not 
be viable for long-term operations, as the stainless steel worm gear would slowly
shave of the bronze gear on the filter arm. However, due to time and resource
constraints, pODI was deployed as is, and the bronze gear was replaced on an annual basis
due to wear and tear.

In 2014 we  started a project to redesign the filter drive, where now 
instead of a worm gear the filter arm would be driven directly by a chain 
drive. The original custom-made gear box of the filter drive was replaced by a commercial, 
encapsulated lubricated worm gear. A single chain-driven filter arm protoype was designed and build
at UW Madison (Figure \ref{fig_filterdrive}, left), and its operation was  successfully demonstrated 
by  over 6000 actuation. After testing, the worm gear box was destructively inspected signs of 
excessive wear - none  were found. 

Upon successful testing, a full complement of nine filter drives were build at 
the NOAO instrument shop, and the upgraded filter drive was installed into the 
ODI instrument during the summer of 2015 (see Figure \ref{fig_filterdrive}, 
right). The new drive has worked without  errors ever after. 



\section{Straylight and Mitigation by additional baffles}

In advance of pODI's  deployment, a detailed straylight analysis executed by
Photon Engineering (Tucson, AZ) indicated that a significant contribution of 
stray light was to be expected on the ODI focal plane. The two major
contributors are (i) off-axis rays reflecting off the tertiary mirror, then the
primary mirror, finally entering the instrument and (ii) off-axis rays
reflecting directly off the tertiary mirror, entering the instrument. The first
stray light mode had already been addressed by installing an additional baffle
at the entrance aperture of ODI. The latter stray light path, however, had not
been mitigated yet. The impact of the straylight is clearly visible in
Figure\ref{fig_straylight}, where we show the view through the instrument (with
the dewar removed) at the center and upper left corner of the field of view.


\begin{figure}[]
\centering 
\includegraphics[height=0.28\textwidth]{images/straylight-center.jpeg}
\includegraphics[height=0.28\textwidth]{images/straylight-offcenter.jpeg}
\includegraphics[height=0.28\textwidth]{images/ODI-Starylight-Annotated-10177.JPG} \\[1ex]

\caption{\label{fig_straylight} View through the ODI instrument and telescope
    onto the WIYN flat field screen. Left: at the center of the field, where only
    the mirror pupil is a major contributor of illumination. Middle: View from the
    upper left corner of the instrument. Additional stray light arcs become visible.
    the upper two arcs originate from the off-field light that enters the instrument
    directly off an reflection of the tertiary mirror. The third lower right arc is
    due to reflection of off field light off the tertiary, onto the primary mirror,
    and  into the instrument. Right: Same as the middle, but with ambient lights 
    switched on. The individual stray light contributors are identified.  }
\end{figure}


For the initial pODI deployment with a smaller focal plane the stray light did
not significantly affect operations; the extended focal plane of 5x6 ODI was
found to be strongly affected by the second stray light path. For night time
observations the stray light manifests in additional background structure that
can be subtracted; it is detrimental for the acquisition calibrating flat field
images, where the stray light contamination was determined to be of order of
30\%. The straylight is loopsided in the instrument, i.e., looking through the
Nasmyth port, only the upper left side of port would be affected by the stray
light, as one would conclude from Figure \ref{fig_straylight}.

The straylight  can be readily identified by comparing flat fields that are
taken at different instrument rotations. We demonstrate this in Figure
\ref{fig_flatfieldbaffle}, where for a set of the g'r'i'z' filters we show the
ratio of dome flats that were taken with a nominal instrument rotation of plus
and minus 90 degrees.  In case of a flat illumination, one would expect a
constant ratio of unity in those images. The flat field ratios however show a
strong sign of (i) central pupil ghosts (see next section) and (ii) stray light
in the lower left corner.

 

\afterpage{%
    % Flush earlier floats (otherwise order might not be correct)
    \thispagestyle{empty}% empty page style (?)
    \begin{landscape}% Landscape page
        \centering % Center table
        \begin{figure} 
            \centering
            \begin{tabular}{ccccc} odi u' & odi g' & odi r' & od i'
                i & odi z' \\ \hline \multicolumn{5}{c}{ratio of $\pm 90 \deg$ flat
                    fields, no baffle} \\[1ex]
                 
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/nobaffle_u.jpeg}
                 &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/nobaffle_g.jpeg}
                 &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/nobaffle_r.jpeg}
                 &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/nobaffle_i.jpeg}
                 &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/nobaffle_z.jpeg}
                 \\[1ex]
                
                
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/baffle_u.png} &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/baffle_g.png} &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/baffle_r.png} &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/baffle_i.png} &
                \includegraphics[width=0.17\columnwidth]{images/baffle_z.png} \\[1ex] 
                \multicolumn{5}{c}{ratio of $\pm 90 \deg$ flat
                    fields, with baffle} \\[2ex] 
            \end{tabular}
            
            \caption{\label{fig_flatfieldbaffle} Ratios of dome flat field images
                taken at an instrument rotator angle of $+90^\circ$ and $-90^\circ$ 
                for all ODI broad band filters. In a stray light free  instrument, the ratio should 
                be uniform. Top: flat field ratios before the telescope baffle installation. 
                bottom: flat field ratios after telescope baffle installation. With the telscope 
                baffles installed, only ghosting from the instrument remains in the flat field 
                ratio; the mitigation of this ghosting is discussed in section \ref{sect_ghost} }
            
        \end{figure}
        
    \end{landscape} 
  % Flush page
}


The straylight was mitigated by installing two additional baffles according to
Photon Engineering's recommendation  at the telescope: One larger ring baffle
around the tertiary mirror, and one slim ring around the secondary baffle. Those
baffles sufficiently block the stray light paths that can be seen in Figure
\ref{fig_straylight}.


\subsection{Pupil ghost suppression using a two bladed shutter}
\label{sect_ghost}

Reflections of the optical surfaces within ODI produce internal ghosting that
contaminate flat field calibration or science exposures.The major contributing
light path is a reflection of ODI’s concave dewar window, that is then back
reflected at a flat filter and then forms an image of the telescope pupil on the
focal plane (Figure \ref{fig_pupilghost}).  Thanks to anti-reflection coatings
on the optics, each reflection is suppressed to about about 1\%-2\% level,
depending on the actual wavelength of the light, but the residual light is still
capable of producing a significant ghosting component.Due to the
wavelength-dependent performance of the anti reflection coating, the pupil ghost
is more pronounced at shorter wavelengths. Also, since the pupil ghost forms by
reflection of a band pass filter, and the there are three layers of filter in
ODI, the size of the pupil ghost will change with the selected filter.

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[height=8cm]{images/odishutterpupilghostsupression.png}
\hspace{0.5cm} \includegraphics[height=8cm]{images/odi_layeronepg.png}
	
\caption{ \label{fig_pupilghost}Left: Formation of the pupil ghost in ODI: 
    light entering the instrument from the telescope (from the right) reflects of
    the concave dewar window, and the converging beam reflects of the filter to form
    an in-focus image of the telescope pupil. Right: Ratio of a flat field taken
    with different shutter modes. The sensitivity variations between pixels and
    detectors cancel out, but the excess ghosting light remains. Note that this
    ratio shows the ghosting component created by filters that are at a different
    location than in Fig. 1, and the pupil ghost is largely out of focus.}
\end{figure}

The pupil ghost is undesirable for several reasons: In night-sky observations it
will produce an extra background component, albeit that can be mitigated by
subtracting out a model. More severely, the pupil ghost also produces an extra
light component in a calibrating flat field, and if not corrected, would lead to
a wrong sensitivity calibration in the affected areas.

The first approach to removing the pupil ghost from calibration images was to
model the ghost image and to then subtract a scaled model from flat field
images. This method was overall successful, but was prone to adding noise and
leaving sharp residual errors. It remains desirable to avoid the pupil ghost
formation in the first place.

The pupil ghost was found to be greatly suppressed by the ODI
shutter\footnote{ODI uses a Bonn Shutter, http://www.bonn-shutter.de} when the
exposure time was very short (less than 0.1 seconds), and the shutter's blades
would obstruct most of the optical path in front of the dewar window; Only a narrow
slit then moves  over the focal plane. This suppression mechanism is illustrated
by Figure \ref{fig_pupilghost}, left. Despite the shutter forming
only a narrow slit, the direct illumination of the focal plane is identical to a
flat field where the shutter completely opens.

This ghost-suppressing behavior of the shutter has been exploited already by
using very short exposure times of order of 50ms for sky flat fields, obsoleting
the need to remove a ghost model from flat fields. But this method is limited to
cases where enough light is available for flat fielding; narrow band filters
cannot be calibrated this way, and as we have seen in the previous chapter, sky
flats can produce additional stray light in the redder filters.

We have circumvented the limitation to very short calibration exposure times by
drastically lowering the travel speed of the shutter blades. The travel time of
the shutter blades across the focal plane is increased to approximately  27
seconds from the factory default of 0.75 seconds.  Now a narrow slot slowly
crosses the field of view, allowing effective exposure times of several seconds.

A good demonstration of the pupil ghost suppression by the shutter is to divide
a flat field where the shutter is operated conventionally by a flat field where
the shutter was operated in the slow narrow-slit mode. Only the extra pupil ghost
component remains visible in the image (Figure \ref{fig_pupilghost}).


\section{Condensation}

A major operational limitation of ODI is the susceptibility of the dewar window
to condensation. As the condensation itself will evaporate quickly under dryer
conditions, we have found that inevitably a significant residue film would be
left that could only be removed by  cleaning (drag wiping with alcohol).
The effect of the residue film is detrimental for any scientific use of ODI,
since it causes significant scattering and halos around objects, where up to 
50\%  of the light would be lost to scattering.


While the dewar window is surrounded by dry air outlets to prevent condensation,
we have identified several scenarios in which the condensation  on the window is 
insufficiently controlled:

\begin{enumerate}

\item {\bf The ambient humidity is above 70\% to 80\%}. The ODI instrument was
not designed as an airtight, or slightly over pressurized instrument, and humid,
ambient air can mix into the instrument cavity (the space between dewar window
and front lens, where the filter arms, shutter, and atmospheric dispersion
compensator are located). It was in fact intended that ambient air was actively drawn
through	the instrument cavity in order to improve thermal equalization.

Condensation would  appear within a minute after the shutter (located directly
in front of the dewar window) was opened. When the shutter remains closed, the
injected dry air is confined to the small space between the dewar window and
shutter. Once the shutter is opened, the  humid air of the instrument cavity
mixes in, and condensation can form on the cold dewar window.

As immediate mitigation against condensation, operations of ODI are limited to
ambient humidity below 70\%RH, and we the active flow was ambient air into the
instrument cavity was inhibited.

\item {\bf Failure of the dry air supply:} The dry air for ODI is generated by a
dehumidifier. At several instances the dry air supply has failed: Mostly due to
a failure in the supplying air compressor (contactor failure or power outages),
but also due to a failure of the dehumidifier, or due to an interruption in the
dry air supply line. In order to protect against failures in the dry air supply,
a redundant air compressor and a larger dry air reservoir tank were installed at
the telescope site. A gaseous Nitrogen tank was added to the dry air system with 
a pressure sensitive valve that opens in the event of a reduction in the dry air
flow rate. Due to the large volume of air required to prevent condensation, 
the Nitrogen handover requires prompt closure of the shutter until the regular 
air supply is restored. The humidity and flow of the dry air have been instrumented
and are monitored with an exception alarm.


\end{enumerate}

Long term, a redundant method of condensation prevention has to be installed for
ODI, e.g., a dewar window heater. Such a heater would have to provide of the
order of 60 W power. Heating strips that can be glued to the perimeter of the
dewar window are readily available, and a the existing dewar window mount allows
for the addition of heaters with a modest machining effort.


\section{Summary}

With the upgrade of the focal plane and the filter drives in 2015, the ODI
instrument has reached a stable state and is a scientifically useful instrument
for the WIYN community. Condensation of the dewar window remains a limitation
during  operations, adn a mitigation strategy by installing a heater has been
identified.

Along the ODI project we have shown that in principle OTA detectors can
successfully tip / tilt image motion, which was the original motivation to 
utilize OTA detectors in ODI.  However, the amplifier glow in ODI's OTAs
prohibits the use of a detector for simultaneous guide star acquisition and
science integration; localized atmospheric image motion compensation within an
isokinetic patch is hence not practical with the devices developed for ODI. Even
if the amplifier glow were to be addressed successfully, there are practical
issues with implementing a rubber focal plane as envisioned in \cite{tonry2002}:
The density of  bright guide stars is insufficient in some  optical passbands,
in particular outside the galactic plane. It is not sufficiently established how
one would proceed to astrometricaly calibrate such a rubber focal plane, and the
data processing effort would be significant for a modest improvement in
delivered image quality. Neither the PanSTARRS survey nor the ODI
instrument have advanced the rubber mode beyond demonstrations.

The choice to use  OTA detectors in ODI has significantly complicated the
design, construction, and operation of the focal plane, including downstream
data calibration. However, no benefits are derived from the use of OTA
detectors.   A change to conventional CCD detectors, such as STA1600 10kx10k
devices would be the next logical step in the evolution of ODI.

%%%% References %%%%%
\bibliography{odi} 
\bibliographystyle{spiejour}

\end{document}
